# hume on morals, passions, and reason
## phil 104 - ethical theories, fall 2021

In Treatise, Hume argues that moral distinctions can produce or prevent actions, while reason cannot, and therefore, moral distinctions are not results of reason on its own. This argument is composed of initial conclusions that are based on arguments made previously in Book I and II of Treatise, as well as arguments that are expanded upon later in Book III, Section I. Given this, I will begin by exploring the relationship between impressions and ideas. I will then link this to discuss the relationship between morals and actions, in which I will here introduce the role of reason based on Hume’s account, specifically how reason is not the motivator of actions nor is in opposition to passions. I will also compare Hobbes’ and Hume’s positions on the relationship between moral rules and reason, and end by offering my own evaluation of Hume’s overall argument. 

We must first understand what passions are in order to understand their relationship to morals and actions. Hume distinguishes between impressions and ideas, in which impression is similar to feeling and idea is similar to thinking. Impressions are perceptions that “enter with most force and violence,” and thus include all sensations, passions, and feelings, while ideas are “faint images of these in thinking and reasoning” (1.1.1.1). There are two types of impressions, impressions of sensation and impressions of reflection. Impressions of sense, also known as ordinary impressions, include all of our sensations; impressions of reflection, or secondary impressions, are derived from these impressions of sense and ultimately include our passions and emotions. In essence, the ideas of pleasure or pain from impressions of sense provoke impressions of reflection. 

With an idea of what passions entail, we can now turn towards the relationship between passions and morals, in which Hume claims that “morals excite passions.” To Hume, moral judgements concern character traits and motivations behind actions; specifically, to make a moral judgement is to decide whether a trait is considered a virtue or a vice. When one makes such judgement, he/she undergoes a feeling of approval or disapproval (3.3.1.3), with the sentiment of approval indicating a virtuous quality and the sentiment of disapproval indicating a vicious trait. And this feeling that one experiences is ultimately considered a passion, not merely what others claim to be “the calm and indolent judgements of the understanding” (3.1.1.5). With moral evaluations giving rise to passions, we can now begin to understand how morality influences, “produce or prevent” actions. When we make a moral judgement about someone’s character or actions and succumb to pleasure or pain, feelings of approval or disapproval, we are impelled to certain actions by our obligations or deterred from others by our opinions of injustice (3.1.1.5). For instance, I am inclined to praise someone for committing an act of virtue as I experience feelings of pleasure and decide based on my own opinion and experience that the action is virtuous. By evaluating someone or an action from a moral standpoint, we experience a sort of push towards or pull away from action and/or people.

We can now examine the second part of Hume’s argument, in which he says that reason is impotent in relation to morals and inciting actions. In Book II, Hume argues that reason can never motivate action or will and it can also never oppose passion in direction of the will (2.3.3.1). Hume relies on a two-fold strategy to criticize practical reason and reject the claim that reason is what leads us toward action. The first approach is through argument by elimination. Hume rejects the role of three premises in order to arrive at the idea that it is not reason that motivates action. The first two are demonstrative and probable reasoning, which compose the two rational functions of reasoning or understanding. Demonstrative reasoning is based on the conceived relationship among ideas; because it is concerned with “abstract relations of ideas” (2.3.3.2) and not the actual lived experience, it itself is not the motivator of action. For example, I know from deductive logic that $100 is greater than $50. Even though I know this is true, I am indifferent towards this, unless, say, I want to buy an item; in this case, it is my desire to buy something that motivates me to work or save more. Similarly, probable reasoning, which deals with cause-and-effect relationships, also fails to demonstrate how reason can affect the will to act. Say I believe that making a cup of coffee in the morning will make me feel pleasure, and thus I feel inclined to get out of bed, brew my coffee, and start my day. Probable or causal reasoning is in play here such that this desire and inclination towards this act of making coffee causes me to think about what it is that is bringing me to act. However, probable reasoning is not at the root of action—the understanding and realization of causal relationships among things and ideas itself is not what motivates us to act; rather, it is still the feeling of pleasure or pain and passion that incites action. Another argument against probable reasoning is given the scenario in which the whatever thing or idea we are dealing with is of no interest to us, which renders its causal relationship also unimportant. We can thus summarize this argument as the following: 

1.  Reason can either be demonstrative or probable.
    
2.  Demonstrative reasoning itself cannot motivate will or action.
    
3.  Probable reasoning itself cannot motivate will or action.
    
4.  Reason by itself cannot motivate will or action. 
    

The second approach that Hume takes to argue against practical reason is what is known as the Representation Argument. It begins with the premise that an object of reason must be able to be determined either true or false. Whether it is true or false depends on the fact that we are able to agree or disagree with ideas, which means that something is not an object of reason if we cannot agree or disagree with its related ideas. We cannot agree or disagree with passions and actions cannot be reasonable or unreasonable (3.3.1.10), and thus, passions are not objects of reason and reason cannot produce or prevent action. Given this and the fact that morality is based on passions, moral distinctions are not the offspring of reason (3.3.1.10). Furthermore, reason can never oppose passion because reason only provides the means of one’s ends, not the ends or results themselves, which are determined by passions. All of this is not to say that reason has no role or place in morals and passions. Reason provides information on the means to our ends, serves as guidance for our passions and will, and helps us deduce the consequences of character traits and actions, and therefore, it does partially influence our moral judgements and actions. Instead, Hume argues that reason alone cannot motivate us to act, and reason alone is not what establishes moral distinctions; it is ultimately the passions or desires that incite action.

Hume’s conception of the relationship among morals, passions, and reason both differs and has similarities with Hobbes’ perspective on moral rules as “precepts of reason.” According to Hobbes, the laws of nature presuppose the right of nature; they are rational principles. In the state of nature where there is a state of war of all against all, Hobbes believes that people will do what they think is necessary to pursue their ends. And given the conditions of diffidence and scarcity within the state of nature, what is rational for people to do is often what is non-cooperative or what ultimately leads to collective irrationality. Thus, based on these conditions and individual strategies, morality is the solution. Moral distinctions are the precepts of reason—they are the principles that the individual should comply with in rational self-interest. This is drastically different from Hume’s argument that moral distinctions are not built on reason and give rise to passions.

Hume provides a fairly methodological and convincing approach to address the relationship between morals and reason or passions. He addresses how even though reason can influence us by allowing us to discover causal relations or “directing a passion,” moral distinctions are not products of only reason and therefore not products of comparing ideas, which leaves impressions or passions. Moral judgements are more felt than judged (3.1.2.1). However, the extent in which reason plays a role in our moral judgements and distinctions as well as our actions in general is a bit unclear and unconvincing at times. In particular, the distinction between the roles of passions or reason in the short term and those in the long term is important such that what motivates actions in the long-term can rely relatively more on reasoning than it does in the short-term. Earlier in Book I of Treatise when Hume discusses the scale of “vivacity” in regards to impressions and ideas, he states that impressions are vivid, while ideas are faint. But what is vivid can often short-term feelings, thoughts, or recollections, and that vividness tends to diminish over time. On the other hand, what is thought or reasoned can potentially stay for longer periods of time and thus influence actions that are oriented more towards long-term goals or desires.