# independence of the personal point of view and agent-centered prerogative (william, scheffler, korsgaard)
## phil 104 - ethical theories, fall 2021

In this paper, I will discuss Williams’ critiques against utilitarian and Kantian conceptions of morality, as well as Sheffler’s argument for the agent-centered prerogative through the independence of the personal point of view. I will then explain Korsgaard’s conception of morality as a response to Williams and Sheffler, and finish by evaluating her argument through a series of objections and responding on her behalf. 

To understand where Williams’ and Sheffler’s views fit in relation to consequentialism and Kantianism, I will briefly explain the consequentialist and Kantian conceptions of morality. For consequentialists, moral assessment is based on the consequences of action; the right action is the one that produces the best consequences and overall state of affairs. The Kantian view differs from consequentialism in that it assesses morality not based on the state of affairs, but on a moral or impartial standpoint. The distinction between a moral point of view and a non-moral or self-interested point of view is that the moral standpoint is impartial to people and their interests.

Williams criticizes both the utilitarian and Kantian views, as they fail to properly account for the critical aspect of why we live at all. In illustrating what it is that keeps us going, Williams is able to show why it is necessary to consider such reasons more seriously than the Kantian and consequentialist views do. He claims that we all have desires, concerns, and projects that constitute what he calls a “character” (5). We have certain desires that keep us living our lives, which he calls categorical desires, desires for things that we want unconditionally. Categorical desires do not depend on us being alive; our desires and projects provide reason for a concern for what happens with our future and more fundamentally, constitute conditions of whether such a future exists at all. For example, I may have the categorical desire to be an artist. This means that I want to be alive so that I can become an artist, not that I want to become an artist if I am alive. We may also have ground projects, which are projects that are closely tied to our existence and give meaning to our lives. Other non-ground projects and experiences may keep us going, but we feel that we might as well have died. What comes from us successfully carrying out our ground projects and commitments, for Williams, is integrity: integrity is based on the projects we identify ourselves with, making up what we consider our lives as fundamentally about. Our projects and interests, even if they are moral or altruistic in nature, can conflict with both the utilitarian view of the best overall state of affairs and the Kantian view of impartial morality. Utilitarianism, assessing morality based on the state of affairs, does not take integrity into account at all, and while the Kantian conception allows more room for agents’ responsibilities for their actions, the impartial point of view will still often conflict with agents’ desires and projects. In particular, Williams believes the Kantian conception would provide the agent with “one thought too many,” in which someone who is faced with a moral dilemma must stop to think whether an act is permissible or not (18). This is not plausible, as someone should act not based on a universalizable maxim, but based on their interests and attachments.

Scheffler’s argument is motivated similarly to that of Williams, in which he criticizes moral theories such as consequentialism and Kantianism for excluding fundamental features of human nature, specifically what he calls the “independence of the personal point of view” (120-121). The independence of the personal point of view is the idea that we perceive the world and our actions from a perspective built on the foundation of our desires, projects, and relationships; it is simply a fundamental fact about our agency. The independence of the personal point of view is most properly positioned in what Scheffler calls the agent-centered prerogative. He motivates his argument for the agent-centered prerogative by illustrating how it takes up a rational strategy for incorporating the independence of the personal point of view. The agent-centered prerogative gives agents permission to not perform the action that would result in the best state of affairs in utilitarian terms. Agents, from the impartial point of view, are allowed to place special importance to their projects and relationships, and if actions for producing the best state of affairs goes against such interests, they are allowed to not act on such actions. While this conception is similar to William’s view such that projects and interests can often conflict with producing the best state of affairs or impartial judgements, it differs from a fully agent-centered view such that it permits the agent to perform the action that would be correct in consequentialist terms, not prohibit it; this is the distinction between agent-centered restrictions and agent-centered prerogatives. According to agent-centered restrictions, there is no non-agent-relative principle for ranking the state of affairs such that agents are always permitted to produce the best state of affairs (113). In other words, it is sometimes impermissible or wrong for someone to commit an action, even if such action would produce the best overall state of affairs. Scheffler rejects agent-centered restrictions, as acting in the way that is right according to consequentialists is often naturally appealing to the moral agent and his/her independent personal point of view. Thus, to say that acting in accordance with the best available outcome is sometimes impermissible is implausible. 

Korsgaard, in The Sources of Normativity, rejects both Williams’ and Scheffler’s views and makes the argument that morality is grounded in human nature. We are binded by normative moral principles of practical reasons, which are built into the structure of our reflective agency. We have practical identities, which are made up of our interests, projects, and relationships, in which we find our lives worth living. Williams sees our projects and relationships as potential conflicts against normative moral principles. Scheffler similarly recognizes how the independence of the personal point of view motivates an agent-centered prerogative that explains how we should act in relation to the separateness of our projects and normative morality. Korsgaard, while she grants that we each have practical identities that are formed by our interests and act based on our interests and projects, claims that the value of what constitutes our practical identities commits us to the moral law, not put us in conflict with it. Morality, according to Korsgaard, is not in conflict, but like a condition of what makes up our practical identities. The way through which we endorse our projects and practical identity guarantees that they are moral.

Korsgaard begins by explaining how we as rational agents are reflective beings: we are conscious of our practical identity, our interests and desires. Our autonomy and the nature of our reflective standpoint is what gives rise to reason, as we must have reason to will and desire certain goals or ends. For instance, I, as a reflective agent, may realize that I want to be an artist. Naturally, I will ask whether I have reason to become an artist, and the answer to this question is a type of principle that tells me whether I ought to be an artist or not. Korsgaard calls such principles the “categorical imperative” (98). The categorical imperative is the principle of the rational will, and it is the law or principle that we construct and impose ourselves: if reasons for our actions and desires arise from our reflectivity, then we are required to identify ourselves with a principle that governs our actions—a principle to ourselves. We identify ourselves with maxims that are good for us, and thus, reasons are intrinsically normative. These principles are binding on us due to their relation to our will and how they are endorsed by us and our reflectivity. We act in accordance with our practical identities, and do what it takes to avoid losing our identities. Thus, reasons are constructed by ourselves insofar as they adopt the practical point of view and endorse principles that are good for us. When we as rational agents act with reason, we are committed to valuing ourselves and our humanity, or our moral identity, as an end. If we abstract from our practical identities, there is the standpoint of humanity, in which it is necessary, unconditioned, and of maximal reflection. Value for anything at all is only directly accessible from within this standpoint of reflective consciousness, and we endorse our practical, contingent identities from this standpoint. So, if we value ends or anything at all from the standpoint of our practical identities, we ultimately endorse the value of humanity as an end itself. And to value our humanity is to have a moral identity. What this ultimately entails is a commitment to complying with the moral principles that Williams and Scheffler believe to conflict with our interests and projects. Finally, because we value our own humanity, we must recognize that we share such humanity with others, and therefore, we must value the humanity of others as well. Korsgaard makes this argument by appealing to the fact that reasons are public, not private. Reasons must be shareable and accessed by others, and so must humanity as well.

A critical part of Korsgaard’s conception of morality is arguing that because we value ends, we are committed to valuing humanity. There is the question of whether she succeeds in making this move and to what extent. One might begin to object to Korsgaard’s account of practical identities being conditioned on morals by arguing that someone can take on an immoral practical identity. For instance, say someone identifies a serial killer. Killing people is bad, both in its consequences and in itself, but one would say that it is the duty of the person who identifies as a serial killer. So, the objector might criticize Korsgaard’s conception of morality as built into our identities and the structure of our reflectivity. How can it be that having a practical identity as a serial killer or the project of killing people be justified? Korsgaard would say that because humanity is the universal identity or standpoint that defines fundamental boundaries for our identities and decisions, being a serial killer is immoral. To kill people is to be against our humanity, or valuing ourselves as humans and ends, and because our practical identities are built on our identity as human, we must commit ourselves to humanity first. We would not follow our practical identities before we act in accordance with our humanity, as our identity as human requires us to value what it is to be human above other interests and desires. Korsgaard would also add that to commit to our humanity entails a commitment to others’ humanities, in which taking others’ lives would go directly against a commitment to the humanity of others. 

Building off of this objection and Korsgaard’s argument that we value our and others’ humanities, we can further examine what it means for us to value humanity as an end. An interpretation of Korsgaard’s conception of the standpoint of humanity is that humanity is valuable unconditionally. Taking from Kant’s conception of the good will, we can say that humanity does not require the presence of anything to be valuable, as it is the absolute most fundamental, general identity, and thus cannot rely on anything else. Given the idea that the standpoint of humanity is fundamental to each of us and is unconditional, we can distinguish our relationship between our practical identities and our human identity. What we identify with and our practical identities are contingent upon various factors and circumstances, but our humanity is non-contingent; it is not dependent on anything and could not be anything else. 

It may seem that we still have not quite gotten to the question of whether or how valuing our practical identity requires us to value our humanity. We can start by more closely examining how we endorse principles that are binding on us, cause us to identify with specific projects and interests, and act in certain ways. If I value creating good art and I identify as a good artist, then, knowing that practicing art in the studio is good for me to improve as an artist, I have the urge to go to the studio. Thus, going to the studio for me can be understood as a categorical imperative, an action that I ought to take whether or not I have an end in mind because I identify as an artist. If I do not identify as a good artist, then going to the studio is not a categorical imperative, but a hypothetical imperative: I might decide to go to the studio because my friend is there or because I have a portfolio to turn in soon, but not solely because it is the right thing to do as someone who identifies as an artist. This means that a principle is binding on us as reflective agents if we identify ourselves with such a principle—we are represented by the principle—and it is a principle that we ultimately construct for ourselves. One way for Korsgaard to make the argument that valuing concrete ends entails valuing humanity as an end is if she can show that identifying with humanity entails being subject to its principles, including that of having a practical identity (one that does not consist of impermissible acts like a serial killer). If she is successful, then valuing ends must commit us to valuing humanity. We are bound to the principles that come with us being reflective agents if we identify ourselves as reflective. If we say that to be human is to be reflective, then if we endorse ourselves to be human, we must be reflective. As a result, everything that we do and identify ourselves as entails reflection and thus being human. Nothing is not conditioned on reflection and being human. We can conclude that if we value our practical identities and concrete ends, then we must value our identity as humans.

One might respond to this conclusion by arguing that valuing our humanity involves impartial morality, which Williams criticizes Kant for. If this is true, then it poses a problem for Korsgaard’s account because it implies that not every normative decision we make from the standpoint of humanity is ours or endorsed by us, but by some other impartial standpoint. As Korsgaard claims that our human identity is our moral identity such that it binds us to principles that we endorse and identify with, she would likely say that the objection cannot be true, as taking the standpoint of humanity entails maximal reflection. To take the standpoint of maximal reflection means that every single decision we make is bound to our point of view, the point of view of humanity. And since, as we have established earlier, that we value humanity because we are reflective agents and it is our humanity, Korsgaard’s argument remains strong.