# kant on the good will
## phil 104 - ethical theories, fall 2021

In the first section of *Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals*, Kant concludes that the good will is good without limitation. I will begin by explaining what the good will is for Kant and what it means for someone to have a good will. I will then examine how the good will differs from other good things including pleasure, specifically in that the good will is both intrinsic and without limitation. Finally, I will raise two potential objections, respond to the objections on Kant’s behalf, and argue that Kant’s argument is valid and should be accepted.

To will is to summon up all of the means insofar as they are in our control, and to have a good will is to have a disposition to will in a certain way and to sincerely attempt to do the right thing. This means that a “good person” or a “person of good will,” according to Kant, is not someone who is simply “good hearted” or sympathetic. To possess the good will is to act out of duty. In essence, having good will is being committed to making decisions that are wholly based on moral considerations and are morally worthy, which means that the person who acts does so because he/she knows that it is the right thing to do, not because of the consequences or potential consequences of the action. In particular, it is to decide and act in a way that is determined by the moral law: for someone to be motivated by duty is to be motivated by principles that are recognized by reason and to act in accordance with such imperatives or maxims. The moral worth is in the possession of the good will, which is determined by the moral law. Therefore, an action has moral worth if the agent’s motive was to act in order to do one’s duty.

Kant provides three other motives for actions that do not have moral worth: self-interest, self-preservation, and sympathy. Actions that are motivated by each of these three cases only conform with duty or align with duty, but are not motivated from duty. Ultimately, actions that are not done from duty lack the moral worth that is only attached to those done from duty. However, this is not to say that those with sympathetic temperaments do not or can not possess good will. A person who is sympathetic can act from motives that are not duty, which would mean that the act does not have moral worth, but it is also possible that he/she acts from duty rather than sympathy or any other motive, and thus, have good will.

Kant claims that this sort of disposition, of someone who acts from good will, is something that we always approve of and highly value. He argues that the good will is both intrinsically and unconditionally good. To say that the good will is intrinsically good is to say that the goodness of good will is inherent in it, rather than a function of its causal effects or consequences (4:394). A good will is not only good when it produces good effects; it is good regardless of its consequences, whether they are good or bad. Kant describes good will as a jewel that would “still shine by itself, as something that has its full worth in itself,” even if it does not produce positive effects or results in negative effects (4:394). We can summarize the argument of the good will being intrinsically good as follows:

1.  Good will is either good because of its consequences or because of its willing. 
    
2.  Good will is not good because of its consequences.
    
3.  Good will is good because of its willing.
    
4.  Thus, good will is intrinsically good.
    

Good will is unconditionally good or good without limitation because it does not require the presence of anything else in order for it to be good. “Talents of the mind,” “qualities of temperament,” and “gifts of fortune,” are three examples of what we generally deem good or admirable (4:394). Kant argues that all three of these can be evil and harmful if they result from bad will. While it is not necessarily the case that these qualities are not intrinsically good, unlike the good will, they are not good without limitation. This is because they require the presence of something else to be good; specifically they are only good if they are backed by good will. Things that require the presence of other things are not good unconditionally, and thus, these three qualities are not good without limitation. A similar logical argument can be applied to the other qualities that Kant examines: “moderation in affects and passions,” “self-control,” and “calm reflection” (4:394). These are also not good without limitation because they are not good without the presence of something else to make them good. Kant, through eliminating the possibility of unconditional good for all other good qualities or characteristics, indicates that only the good will is good without limitation. 

In order for qualities such as the talents of the mind, qualities of temperament, and gifts of fortune to be bad or evil, it must be that they are not derived from good will. Thus, the only way for these qualities to be good is for them to be backed by the good will. To summarize the relationship between characteristics we deem good or admirable and the good will, it is the good will that makes a quality good.

Now that we have established that the good will is good in itself and without limitation, I will compare this conception to Sidgwick’s hedonist idea that pleasure is intrinsically good. Pleasures, according to Sidgwick, are desirable feelings and experiences, and states of pleasure are intrinsically good, while states of pain are intrinsically bad. For Sidgwick, not only is pleasure good, but it is ultimately the only good. Goodness here is seen as an end, not just as a means. Kant rejects the hedonistic conception of pleasure and goodness in two ways: (1) pleasure is not the only good, and (2) not all pleasures are good. It is clear for Kant that not everything that is good is pleasure—qualities like courage and sympathy are not pleasure but are good, with limitation (1). While pleasure is intrinsically good and not extrinsically good in that the goodness of pleasure is inherent in it, it is not good without qualification (2). For instance, let us consider the case of a sadist’s pleasures. From a hedonist perspective, the pleasures of the sadist are outweighed by the negative effects from suffering, resulting in net negative utility. But for Kant, the pleasure of a sadist is evil in that the pleasure is caused by suffering, something bad. Thus, pleasure is not good without qualification.

We can take this argument to address a potential objection. Kant argues that talents of the mind, qualities of temperament, and gifts of fortune are not good without limitation. One might argue that these qualities are in fact intrinsically and unconditionally good. Even if someone uses them for evil ends, it does not make them bad. Take courage for example. How is it that courage itself can ever be bad? Although such characteristics may be good in themselves, they are not good without limitation. With evil people, qualities like courage are ultimately bad because they are motivated from evil or bad will. Thus, this objection does not render Kant’s overall conclusion invalid, and we return to Kant’s idea that the goodness of these qualities is from good will. 

Taking this argument that something is conditionally good such that it is not good unless it comes from good will, a further potential objection is that quality Z, a quality that is not good will, need not be conditioned on good will for it to be good. We can say that Z is not unconditionally good if it is not good will or if it is not backed by good will. However, one might think that Z can be good without being conditioned on the good will; just because Z is not good without limitation does not mean that the good will is the one and only thing that would make Z good. In this case, Kant would likely say that it is only the good will that makes something good because only the good will is good without limitation. A quality Z can not always be good if it is conditioned on another quality that is only conditionally good. Therefore, such an objection is not substantial, and Kant’s argument is valid. 

Kant argues that the good will is the only good thing without limitation. Good will is good in itself such that it is always good regardless of its consequences, and it does not require other things for it to be good. Given Kant’s argument for why only the good will is intrinsically and unconditionally good and the fact that the potential objections to the argument’s propositions are insubstantial, Kant’s argument remains successful.

**