# essay on jonas' *cybernetics and purpose: a critique*
## phil 132 - philosophy of mind, fall 2021

In this paper, I will explain the cybernetics view on animal behavior as feedback mechanisms, Jonas’s critique of cybernetics, and how his argument relates to the distinction between animals and machines.

According to cybernetics, humans and other animals are conceived of as feedback mechanisms, communication systems, and computing machines. Feedback is the mechanism in which part of output energy or the outcome of an action is redirected as an input for further action foIn other words, animals can be interpreted as machines. The cybernetics view offers a mechanistic model that applies to material and mental phenomena identically and at once, and thus rejects dualism, which is the view that material and mental phenomena are distinct. In essence, cybernetics aims to explain animal behavior through feedback mechanisms. Jonas, in “Cybernetics and Purpose: A Critique,” aims to reject the cybernetics view and argue that animals are not simply machines because they have emotion and purpose.

One aspect of cybernetics is the view that purposeful behavior appears as a subdivision of active behavior … directed to the attainment of a goal—i.e, to a final condition” (112). An implication of this conception is that purposeful behavior does not require purpose. Jonas rejects this, and illustrates the important role of purpose in purposive behavior by using the example of a self-steering torpedo. The purpose of the torpedo is to hit a desired target, as it is the result of the torpedo’s behavior if it is successful. Let us say, in accordance with the cybernetics view, that the behavior of the torpedo is purposeful because it is self-adaptive with regard to the desired result; it adjusts itself along its course, with respect to its surroundings. Cyberneticians argue that the overall purpose of the subject in question must reside in the whole, which results in the question of whether the mechanism itself is a whole, having an identity that is “the bearer of purpose, the subject of action, and the maker of decisions” (118). Jonas argues that this is not true, as we can imagine a man who steers and is in control of the torpedo. The man is ultimately the agent of purpose because if we take the man away from the torpedo, the purpose remains with the man, not the torpedo—the torpedo becomes simply a tool, not a self-sufficient whole. Cyberneticians might respond to Jonas’ objection to the whole by arguing that the man acts only in response to the information from his receptors, and thus functions as a feedback mechanism himself. Jonas responds by saying that the man responds and takes up a certain perception in light of his purpose of keeping the torpedo on target. In other words, his behavior is in respect to and adjusted according to the end or goal in view; it is the man’s interests, concerns, and purpose that guide purposive behavior. Therefore, we conclude that purpose is a necessary condition for purposive behavior. 

Cybernetics relies on the sentience and motility, which constitute the feedback mechanisms, of subjects to explain purposive behavior, excluding the need for the subject to have a purpose. The process of undergoing feedback appears to be goal-directed or purposeful; however, this appears not to be the case, as demonstrated through the torpedo example, in which purposive behavior is tied to purpose. With this, Jonas concludes that purposive behavior requires the presence of purpose. Only on purpose and the subject’s interests and motivations can cybernetics’ feedback operate. Even if the purpose is not intrinsic to the subject—for instance, a commander demanding the man to operate the torpedo is extrinsic to the man-torpedo system—there is still a purpose that exists, extrinsic to the man-torpedo system. If we replace the man with a machine, the purpose of the commander still remains.

Cybernetics makes the mistake of confusing “serving a purpose” or “carrying out a purpose” and “having a purpose” (122), and it misses a critical component of living things, namely emotion. Jonas argues that “living things are creatures of need,” and this is the case only for living things (126); this means that emotion is unique to animals and not tools or machines. Needs and will result in emotions such as appetite and fear, which manifest through goals, purpose, and purposive behavior. Emotion motivates and guides motility, such that motility requires effort, which comes from interest and desire. Motility is also often guided by perception; in the case of the torpedo example, emotion informs perception such that the man’s interests determine what data is processed as information, specifically information that is relevant to his interests. Emotion is sustained—it is ceaseless in carrying on metabolism and allows animals to continue going—while feedback mechanisms are not and do not keep animals going (126). So, while cybernetics reduces animal nature to sentience and motility, Jonas argues that this is not comprehensive, and that what encompasses animal nature is perception, motility, and emotion, with emotion being the most fundamental quality as it ties perception and motility together. Because machines do not have emotion or embody a purpose like animals, Jonas thus rejects the cybernetics view and the argument that animals are machines.

Another point that Jonas briefly discusses in his paper is reflection, in which reflection operates closely in accordance with emotion. Similar to how emotion separates animals from machines, reflection is another distinct quality that distinguishes humans and animals from machines. We are reflective beings. We endorse our desires, projects, and purpose through reflection and by asking whether an action is good or bad in relation to our interests and our identities. Animals are also capable of learning from mistakes, a kind of self-reflection that machines do not have. Machines are not reflective and do not reflect upon their purposive behavior, while humans and animals do.