# essay on nagel's *what is it like to be a bat*
## phil 132 - philosophy of mind, fall 2021

Nagel explores the question of whether the mind is something we can make sense of in physical terms. While the reductive physicalist would argue that consciousness can be described through physical processes, Nagel argues that we currently have “no conception of what an explanation of the physical nature of a mental phenomenon would be” (436), as consciousness fits in the problem in a way that makes it impossible to explain how mental states can be reduced to physical processes. 

For an organism to have mental states or a consciousness at all is for there to be something it is like to be that organism, and Nagel calls this the “subjective character of experience” (436). Given that an organism has a subjective character of experience, he argues that the subjective character of experience is not explainable by reductionism, functionalism, intentional states, or causality, as they leave out the subjectivity of consciousness and experience (436). In other words, the subjectiveness of consciousness poses a critical problem for such positions that attempt to explain consciousness through objective, reductionist, or physicalist terms. In order to understand consciousness, we must explain the subjective character of experience; however, because the subjective character of experience cannot be described by reductionist terms, we cannot explain consciousness through such means. 

Nagel chooses to use bats to illustrate the connection between the mind-body problem and the subjective character of experience, as they are similar to humans such that they are mammals and have conscious experience, but experience and perceive the world in a way that is distinct from us. They experience the external world in ways such as through echolocation, and due to this different form of perception along with the different ways bats live by flying and eating insects, it creates a barrier for us as humans to try to understand what it is like to be a bat. We are only capable of imagining what it is like for us to behave like bats, as this is the limitation of the resources of our own mind, and we are unable to know what it is like for a bat to be a bat (439). Therefore, while we may say that a bat experiences emotions and desires, it is not possible to form a conception of what it is actually like for a bat to experience and have these mental states, and thus be a bat. For us to understand what it is like to be an organism such as a bat, we must be the ones experiencing such mental states—we must take up the point of view of the bat. The subjective character of experience is ultimately not accessible to us, as we are limited to only one point of view, our own. And because each subjective experience is tied to one particular point of view, it is not possible for us to have an objective understanding of consciousness.

Even if we do not deny physicalism, the view that mental states are physical processes, as a whole, we do not have a conception of how this is the case. For us to know that something is true (e.g. X is Y or X = Y), we do not necessarily need to know how it is true. But if mental processes are physical processes, then “there is something it is like, intrinsically, to undergo certain physical processes” (445-446). But due to the subjectivity of consciousness, we cannot conceive of how this can be true. In order for us to know how the physicalist position is true, we must find a way to devise a new method of understanding consciousness and how it relates to the mind and body, an objective framework that is not dependent on empathy or our imagination.

Nagel argues that it is not possible to understand what it is to be a bat without taking up the bat’s point of view, and that no amount of human knowledge is sufficient in explaining a bat’s consciousness. A critic might say that the central question we are after is whether we can understand what a bat’s consciousness is, not understand what it is like to be a bat or to have the mind of a bat, and that we can understand a bat’s consciousness. In other words, we can, through scientific experimentation and an advanced understanding of neuroscience, understand what a bat’s consciousness is like without being a bat or having the mind of a bat. 

Nagel would respond by saying that he is not making the epistemological claim that we cannot know what a bat’s consciousness is like, but rather, that if we want to answer the question of a what a bat’s consciousness is like, we need to know what it is like to be a bat; thus we need to take up the point of view of the bat. One line of reasoning that Nagel could use to respond to the objection is by appealing to the entanglement of consciousness. We cannot simply separate and isolate consciousness from the mind or the body; our conscious experiences are deeply entangled with our entire being and body. With this argument, Nagel could respond by arguing that even with an infinite amount of human conceptual knowledge about a bat’s consciousness, we still cannot have a comprehensive understanding of what it is like to be a bat. We cannot possibly tell how well we are able to capture major features of a bat’s consciousness. Say we are somehow able to capture the essence of an organism’s consciousness.  How would we know whether capturing the main essence of a bat’s consciousness fully explains what it is like to be a bat? Not only do we not have the ability to experience a bat’s consciousness, but we also do not entirely know how the nature of consciousness, the mind, and body depend on one another even if we somehow separate consciousness.

Another further potential response is that we still do not have a full understanding or agreement with what consciousness entails for us as humans. We study human consciousness through the methods and resources available to us. But what is critical is that we are still the experiencers of our own consciousness: what we know about our consciousness is ultimately in light of our experiencing. Thus, we cannot understand a bat’s consciousness without taking the point of view of the bat or being a bat, and Nagel’s argument remains strong.