# an assortment of responses
## phil 121 - moral questions of data science, spring 2022

### final exam

#### Free Speech - Meiklejohn, Shiffrin

According to Meiklejohn, self-governance is the justification for free speech. Freedom of speech comes from the importance of the program of self-government and democracy, and speech related to democracy and of public interest is protected by the First Amendment. Shiffrin, however, has a different, thinker-based view: he argues that what justifies freedom of speech is freedom of thought. This differs from a speaker or listener-based view, and the basis of this thinker-based theory are the ideas that individuals are interested in protecting the freedom of their minds, have significant rational, emotional, perceptual, and sentient capacities, and at our core, value the possession and exercise of such capacities. Free speech is what serves such interests and allows us to possess and exercise these capacities and realize our interests in self-development and knowledge. Furthermore, it “makes possible complex forms of social life” and helps develop some capacities important to moral agency (Shiffrin 291-292). Several forms of speech, such as incendiary speech and those not related to discussion about what the government should do, would likely be examples in which Shiffrin’s theory would likely protect, but not Meiklejohn’s. One particular example would be the case in which someone, during a class discussion, goes on a passionate, provocative tangent about how the current discussion relates to a personal conversation. Shiffrin’s theory would likely protect such speech, as she states that a decent system of freedom of speech must protect political and other forms of dissent, and that for this example, it should be protected because it is an exercising of the thinker’s autonomous reaction and emotional capacities. Meiklejohn would likely not protect this kind of speech and say that this person is a public nuisance; such speech is not only not relevant to what the government should do, but also interrupts productive classroom activity.


#### Values of Choice - Scanlon

In “The Value of Choice,” Scanlon offers three main reasons for valuing choice. Predictive or instrumental value of choice is the case in which choice is critical to my own future enjoyment; the choice that I make in a situation is a good predictor of what I feel is good for me. In the case of marriage, getting to choose who I marry is instrumental to my life and my future enjoyment. I would be spending much of my life with the person I choose to marry, and would thus want to have the ability to choose who I spend my life with. The second reason for valuing choice is because it is representative—choices and the decisions I make communicate and/or manifest my attitudes. With marriage, I want to have chosen who I married myself, as it has a particular meaning if I choose who I marry myself. It is a deep reflection of who I am, my values, desires, tastes, affections, etc. What makes this even stronger is the significant role that marriage plays in our society; who I choose to marry is a decision that affects not only myself and values, but the judgements that others form about me and my character. The third value of choice is that it is symbolic. One way of understanding this is that if I do not have or are not able to exercise choices in certain situations, this can be seen as a reflection of a negative judgment, that I am not competent or am not mature enough, for instance. With marriage, I, especially having grown up in an environment in which choosing who to marry is the norm, have a reason to choose my partner because not being able to choose would be demeaning; it is a symbol of me not being independent or responsible enough to make such a decision. 


#### Free Choice - Frankfurt

The willing addict has the same first-order desires, second-order desires, and second-order volitions; the unwilling addict has conflicting first-order desires and the second-order volition that the first or second-order desire he believes to be good for him be effective; the wanton has first-order desires or conflicting first-order desires, but does not reflect upon them and thus does not have second-order desires or volitions. According to Frankfurt, one must have second-order volitions to be considered a person, and one has freedom of the will when his effective desires conform to his second-order volitions; he has the will he one wants to have. When someone acts freely and of his own free will, he is said to be morally responsible—he acts in accordance to what he wants to do because he both wants to do it and from the will he wants to have. The willing addict has the first-order desire, second-order desire, and second-order volitions to watch the next YouTube video. Because he has a second-order volition, he would be considered a person, but he does not have freedom of the will because even if his second-order volition were not to watch the next YouTube video, his effective desire would still be to watch the video. However, he is morally responsible because he wants to watch the video and his will to watch the video is the will that he wants to have. The unwilling addict is also a person because he has second-order volitions, and he does not have freedom of the will because he does not have the will he wants to have, which is to not watch the next video, assuming he believes that not watching the video would be better for him. The unwilling addict is not morally responsible because his second-order volition does not directly cause his first-order desire. The wanton is not a person because he does not have second-order volitions, and he does not have freedom of the will, as he does not want to have any will. The wanton is not morally responsible because he does not have second-order volitions or will in the first place.


#### Monitoring and Guidance - Vredenburgh

Grades on papers come with comments for the main reason of allowing the receivers, students, to understand why they received a particular grade. Without an explanation or understanding of the decision behind grades, students are unable to exercise what Vredenburgh in “The Right to Explanation” calls informed self-advocacy. Self-advocacy is important as students have a natural interest in their interests being taken into account; specifically, students are invested in their academics, and the grades they receive play a role in shaping their academic careers. Two ways in which students are able to engage in self-advocacy are through monitoring and guidance, in which individuals are able to exercise accountability in order to remedy mistakes or unfairness, and individuals have agency over navigating systems of rules to achieve their goals, respectively (Vredenburgh 4). “Monitoring” is important because students have interests in determining whether their grades are assigned fairly and accurately, as well as holding their graders accountable to such standards. Feedback on papers allow students to decide whether the grades they received were fair based on the comments that justify the assigned grades and to potentially start further conversations on the paper and comments. Another reason why comments on papers are important is because they facilitate “guidance,” as students are able to use the justification behind the grade they received on a particular assignment to understand what the grader is looking for and thus be better prepared for the next assignment. For students, having a good gauge on what they need to do to succeed the next time gives them more control over the grades they receive, which in turn allows them to have a higher chance of bringing about better outcomes for their academic careers and achieving their academic goals.