# examining fairness and treating as individuals through streaming histories
## phil 121 - moral questions of data science, spring 2022

Suppose that applicants who watch more academic-oriented videos or for shorter periods of time are said to have higher academic performance, while applicants who watch music and lifestyle videos or for longer periods of time are said to have lower academic performance. One complaint applicants may have is that using YouTube streaming histories as an indicator of whether to admit or reject applicants is wrong because it fails to treat them as individuals: the college admissions office forms judgments based on preferences applicants do not have the same kind of deliberate agency over like other factors considered in the admissions process, such as coursework and personal projects. Preferences for videos and streaming platforms are based on desires that people naturally have. And because applicants do not have the kind of control over their video streaming preferences that they do for the other factors that shape their lives and admission chances, making judgements based on natural preferences and deciding whether to admit or reject an applicant based on something they do not have control over would result in a failure to fully treat applicants as individuals. 

Another reason why students might criticize the admissions office for not respecting their autonomy as individuals is that YouTube streaming histories can be based on values, projects, and commitments that differ from applicant to applicant. Such values and commitments are constitutive features of individuals, and these are not considered in the correlation or by the academic office because it does not have information about the reasons behind why students watch YouTube videos or how watching such videos is representative of them as an individual. For example, not all students who watch particular types of videos have the same reason for watching those videos; someone may be passionate about video-making, which would lead to long periods of time spent on YouTube, but is an important interest and project that shapes the individual. So the reasoning behind why students watch videos or certain types of videos can vary in ways that provide pertinent information on who they are as individuals, and failure to recognize such differences would cause the college admissions office to not properly treat applicants as individuals. Treating applicants properly as individuals is important because it allows the college admissions board to admit or reject students based on the role they can play at the institution and have played in shaping themselves, rather than treating them as “determined by [other] categories or other matters of statistical fate” (Eidelson 216). The admissions office would be treating applicants as partially determined by a category that does not fully show how applicants’ projects and interests influence the role they can play at the college as individuals. And the admissions office should make judgments about admissions decisions based on factors applicants have control over and are allowed to express their individuality through, as the goal of the office is to admit students based on how they have shaped themselves as individuals. 

However, on Eidelson’s conception of what it means to respect applicants as individuals, this complaint does not necessarily fail to treat applicants as individuals. Eidelson, in “Treating People as Individuals,” argues that someone treats another person as an individual if neither the character condition nor the agency condition are violated. The character condition states that the college admissions office treats applicants as individuals if it gives reasonable weight to evidence of the ways that the students have exercised their autonomy in giving shape to their lives (coursework, grades, personal projects, etc.), where this evidence is “reasonably available and relevant at hand” (Eidelson 216). So, assuming that the admissions office is rational and properly takes into account the other important criteria that determine admissions, the character condition would not be violated, as reasonable weight has been given to the ways that students are able to exercise their autonomy, such as through coursework and activities. The agency condition states that the college admissions office treats applicants as individuals if its judgements (determining whether an applicant is likely to be a high or low academic performer) concern applicants’ choices (YouTube streaming histories) in a way that does not denigrate students’ capacities to make such choices as an autonomous agent (Eidelson 216). In this case, the agency condition is only violated if, based on the correlation, the admissions office says that applicants who watch non-academic-related videos make poorer academic decisions and thus are likely to perform worse, treating such applicants as less capable of making good academic decisions than their counterparts. But the agency condition is not violated since the admissions office does not fail to recognize applicants as autonomous agents capable of deciding how to act for themselves. Predicting or assuming whether an applicant performs well or poorly is not a judgment about a direct choice that a candidate will make. Rather, academic performance is determined based on a combination of factors such as time spent on coursework, in which these are often determined by individuals’ actions. Thus, if the complaint is that the college admissions board fails to respect applicants as autonomous individuals, it is acceptable for the college admissions board to use YouTube streaming histories as a factor in admissions decisions because it does not violate Eidelson’s criteria for treating students as individuals.

Another complaint that students may have is—assuming that the admissions office does not tell applicants about using YouTube streaming histories as a factor in admissions, explain how the correlation works, or why it is used—it is wrong that students are not provided such explanations. Without an explanation or understanding of the decision behind using the correlation or how the correlation helps the admissions office determine who should be admitted or rejected, students are unable to exercise what Vredenburgh calls informed self-advocacy. And such self-advocacy is important as individuals have a natural interest in their interests being taken into account. Using Vredenburgh’s conception of informed self-advocacy in “The Right to Explanation,” individuals must be able to exercise informed self-advocacy for the decision-making process to be fair. Self-advocacy can come about in two ways, one in which individuals have agency over navigating systems of rules to achieve their goals, and the other in which they are able to exercise accountability in order to remedy mistakes or unfairness (Vredenburgh 4). A right to explanation is what ensures informed self-advocacy, so the applicants can argue that they have a right to an explanation behind the use of the correlation, as they have a right to advocate for themselves and their interests and to have a say in what goes on behind the admissions decision process. In this scenario, without the admissions office providing explanation for using YouTube streaming histories, students are not able to engage in informed self-advocacy because they cannot hold the admissions office accountable for possible unfairness and they also do not have the ability to navigate the admissions process with accordance to their interests of being admitted. Thus, the admissions office treats applicants unfairly such that applicants are unable to exercise informed self-advocacy. 

In order for the process to be fair, the admissions office would need to provide two types of explanations that applicants can understand, “backwards-looking normative explanations” and “forwards-looking causal explanations” (Vredenburgh 9). Backwards-looking normative explanations are explanations that explain the decision of admission or rejection in terms of using the YouTube streaming histories correlation and the main normative reasons why the correlation was used in the process appropriately. Such explanations ultimately enable accountability, such that applicants are able to check whether the admissions office was fair in using the correlation information. The other kind of explanation, forward-looking causal explanations, are ones in which the decision-maker explains what an individual should do to satisfy the rules; in this case, the admissions office would explain what applicants should do in terms of their YouTube streaming histories to have a higher chance of being classified as someone who is likely to perform well academically and thus admitted. This would allow students to adjust their streaming histories to get their desired outcome, to have a better chance of being admitted.