# utilitarianism
## phil 121 - moral questions of data science, spring 2022

I walk by a pond and have the option of either saving my sister or two strangers from drowning. Utilitarianism, the view that the right thing to do is the action that maximizes pleasure over pain, would likely say that I should save the two strangers because doing so would lead to two lives saved, as opposed to one. However, intuitively, it seems at least okay that I choose to save my sister. This scenario poses problems for two aspects of utilitarianism, aggregation and consequentialism, which say that an outcome is better if the sum of what is good for people as an end in that outcome is greater, and that we are morally required to perform the action that, from among all possible outcomes actions we can perform, produces the best outcome, respectively. 

For aggregation, utilitarianism would say that the sum of happiness or pleasure, if we take the hedonist standpoint such that what is good as an end is pleasure, is greater if I save the two strangers. This is because if I save the two strangers, then the total pleasure is the sum of the pleasure of stranger one, stranger two, and their respective family and friends. If I save my sister, the total pleasure is the pleasure of my sister, me, and our family and friends. Let us assume that the total sum of pleasure over pain is in fact greater if I save the two strangers. Thus, aggregation would say that saving the two strangers is the better outcome overall. A potential question for aggregation is how do we really know that saving two strangers does actually lead to a better overall outcome? While it is true that two lives are more than one, the pleasure from the outcome of saving the two strangers may not necessarily be more than that of saving my sister. For instance, if we say that the strangers do not have family or friends, then it is possible that there would be more pleasure overall if I save my sister, assuming that we have many family and friends. In this case, there would be more net pleasure if I saved my sister. Thus, the scenario presents a problem with aggregation such that it is not clear whether saving the two strangers leads to a better outcome over saving my sister.

This pond scenario also illustrates a potential problem for consequentialism. If we assume that saving the two strangers does in fact lead to the better outcome because saving the two strangers results in more pleasure than if I save my sister, consequentialism would say that I am morally required to save the two strangers because that is the right action that leads to the best outcome. Given that the best outcome results from saving the strangers, am I still morally required to perform the action that leads to this outcome? Many would argue that I am not required to save the strangers and that it is at least acceptable to save my sister, if not more so than saving two strangers, because she is my sister. This response to the scenario indicates how consequentialism fails to take our personal desires and relationships into proper account. In particular, consequentialism takes an objective standpoint, such that if my sister were a stranger, it would be clear that saving two strangers is better than one; it does not matter that my sister is drowning, I should perform the action that leads to the best overall state of affairs from an impartial standpoint. But given that I am the one who needs to make the decision of who to save, saving the two strangers does not lead to a better outcome for me. And I am the one who is put in the situation after all. It seems intuitive that because I was in the situation of being the person to either save my sister or two strangers, I should be allowed to save my sister. If it were someone else in the situation who does not have any relationship with my sister or the two strangers, then it would be more clear that saving two people is likely better than one, assuming that the pleasure produced is greater by saving two people instead of one, because there are no personal relationships involved. While utilitarianism provides a plausible explanation for the right action, to save the two strangers, the pond scenario points at a few aspects of utilitarianism, aggregation and consequentialism, that seem to go against our intuitions.