# cathy o'neil's weapons of math destruction essay
## phil 121 - moral questions of data science, spring 2022

Miles Wernick and his team developed a predictive model that created a list of the approximately 400 people who would most likely commit a violent crime and ranked them on the probability that they would be involved in a homicide. Robert McDaniel was one of the people on the list. Although he himself did not have a history of gun violations or been charged with a violent crime, he was surrounded by and knew many who were involved with the criminal justice system. And even though he only received a warning from the Chicago police, O’Neil questions the fairness of his situation. McDaniel grew up in a poor and dangerous neighborhood, in which many of the people he knew were involved in crime. And he was claimed to be dangerous even though the place he grew up in and the consequential crime are things that are out of his control. If McDaniel were to do something that would get him into trouble with the police, the consequences would be much higher now that he has been warned. The model has been used by the Chicago police as a way to prevent and eliminate crime, often through arrests. 

Let us say that the list includes people who are not likely to commit a violent crime and excludes people that are likely to commit violent crimes. Those who are on the list but are not actually likely to commit a violent crime and are subject to unnecessary warning and surveillance can be seen as false positives, and those who are likely to commit a violent crime but are not on the list are false negatives. McDaniel’s case is an example of a false positive, such that based on his background and criminal history, should not have been on the list. As a result, it is unfair to McDaniel and people with similar cases that they are undeservingly put on the list. The unfairness of McDaniel’s situation is a result of Wernick's algorithm not properly taking account the full background of individuals, specifically the neighborhood they grew up in, the people they are acquainted with, and their own individual actions. A policy that could prevent cases similar to McDaniel’s is one that aims to reduce false positives, and one way of doing so is requiring that an individual’s neighborhood, associations, and personal actions be properly taken into account when developing the model to determine whether he/she should be on the list. This might entail incorporating the neighborhood and the people associated as features in the model, as well as figuring out how closely correlated one’s actions are with the potential of committing a violent crime. This policy would help reduce the false positive rate because it utilizes additional information outside of just the current crime patterns, helping the Chicago police avoid situations such as that of McDaniel. By ensuring that individuals who do not actually have a high probability of committing a violent crime are not on the list, there would be fewer false positives. 

A possible objection to the policy is that because there is a decrease in false positives, there may be an increase in false negatives. This would cause the list to exclude people who are in fact likely to commit a violent crime, which would have high consequences, as people who are likely to commit a violent crime are not warned and supervised by the police, leading to more crime. It may seem that the policy would not lead to increased false negatives because it only requires that there be additional features added and information considered without directly lowering the model’s current standard for what makes an individual a high risk. However, there can still be an increase in false negatives: if the policy requires that those creating the predictive model better consider individual circumstances, it is possible that that additional information is not only not effective in increasing the predictive accuracy of the model (if that information does not provide highly correlated information on potential for violent crime), but also lead to a change of the standard for what makes a person likely to commit a violent crime. This is because looking into individual backgrounds and information can lead to an imbalance between those individual circumstances and the current way the model uses overall patterns in neighborhoods by emphasizing the individual background more heavily. This means that the policy could leave out people who are in fact highly likely to commit a violent crime. Thus, the policy would help reduce false positives while also potentially increasing false negatives, which is harmful as it leads to more potential crime.