# dewey - what is integral experience?
## phil 110 - aesthetics, fall 2020

In *Art as Experience*, John Dewey presents the idea of “an experience,” or integral experience, in which he defines it as the material of experience that is consummated or “runs its course to fulfillment” (305, middle left). It is not something that just happens to someone, but rather, something that one can accomplish—it involves a deliberate interaction and engagement between that person and the experience. Dewey makes a clear distinction between something that embodies “an experience” from something that is simply “experience,” also known as inchoate experience; an inchoate experience is one in which the subject is distracted and thus does not complete its course of action. This is important because only “an experience” is self-containing, has an individualizing quality, and can be found both integrated within and separated in general streams of experience, as opposed to other inchoate experiences.

The nature of “an experience” can be connected to Dewey’s perspective on rhythm, harmony, and equilibrium, which he introduces earlier in the first chapter of his piece. According to Dewey, there are rhythmic phases of conflict and resolution that occur within subjects and later result in harmony and equilibrium. This state of balance is built on the foundations of unity. With this relationship established between “an experience” and unity, he makes the argument that works of art are thus considered integral experience; seemingly distinct elements and experiences are combined to create a unity. Such a unified experience leads to these elements’ identities being enhanced rather than diminished. Dewey also mentions that aesthetic experiences entail flow, connection, and development, and that aesthetic quality—quality that is emotional, dynamic, public, and continuous—is part of what makes “an experience.” And it is the emotional aspect of aesthetic quality that ultimately gives rise to unity among the detached, a critical component of an integral experience. Throughout what he describes as moving towards consummation, such events or experiences are constantly changing, with the imaginative state coming into play as a catalyst for the harmonies and conflicts that occur with change. However, it is important to note that while aesthetic qualities constitute the unity portion of integral experience, an aesthetic experience is not the same as “an experience.” 

To Dewey, “an experience” begins with the subject undergoing something, and in return, the thing or its respective properties determines the subject’s doing. Yet it is not merely an alteration between doing and undergoing, but a relationship. In other words, there is a clear, reciprocated interaction and harmony between the two. Unlike integral experience, “experiences” are limited by what “interferes with perception of the relations between undergoing and going” and lack balance between doing and receiving (309, bottom right). Because intelligence requires a similar doing and undergoing, which is part of the internal integration that makes “an experience,” Dewey argues that art should not be separated from intellect. Thus, synthesizing the propositions made about how aesthetic quality and emotion are involved with the unity of the integral experience, and how the process of intellectual integration depends on aesthetic quality, Dewey arrives at the idea that “an experience” is neither solely emotional nor intellectual. 

Further building on this concept of “doing and undergoing,” he explains how it is parallel to the production and consumption that occurs with art and the artist. Art involves the same process of doing and undergoing that makes an integral experience such that there is a complex interconnectedness among art, the aesthetic experience, and the artist. The artist must first have a perceptive awareness of the object or art, and then this perception develops into an intimate relationship that revolves around the artist in a constant state of shaping and altering the object, tension and resolution; such processes are supplemented and made whole by both observation and imagination. Only with this rhythmic intake and outgiving, producing and consuming, can there be true integration and thus “an experience.” 

The integral experience can be expressed with three main stages: inception, development, and fulfillment or consummation. It begins with perception, in which the subject encounters and interacts with the object, and then moves to the development stage. Here, the experience is integrating itself through the rhythmic processes of doing and undergoing, and in doing so, creates a form of the whole that is present in each individual part. And the final stage, consummation, is not just a simple end to this dynamic process. Instead, it is a continuous function, as the artist is always in the process of completing at every stage of his/her work.