#  aesthetic experiences and substantive disagreement from kant's *critique of judgement*

## phil 110 - aesthetics, fall 2020

In his “Critique of Aesthetic Judgment,” Kant presents four moments to analyze the judgement of taste. The first moment is where he establishes the argument that judgments of taste are aesthetic experiences and based on feeling; these are specifically feelings of pleasure, pleasure that is “disinterested.” To delineate why pleasure is impartial, which he describes as “independent of all interest” (132, left), Kant provides two other types of judgements based on feeling, the agreeable and the good, judgements that are ultimately “coupled with interest” and thus are not indifferent. While the agreeable is what gratifies and the good is what approves, the beautiful is simply what pleases (134, left). This distinction demonstrates that taste in the beautiful is not ruled by concepts or reason, but is a subjective experience that entails what Kant calls “free delight.” 

In the second moment, Kant builds upon the propositions made in the first moment to argue that the nature of the beautiful results from the fact that judgements of the beautiful have “subjective universal validity.” He first connects this to the idea of how the individual or Subject is completely free of the liking corresponding to the Object because of the impartiality, then goes on to arrive at the argument that the Subject believes there is a similar delight or experience among others. In essence, the Subject judges not simply for himself, but for everyone, and further, Kant describes this universal voice as one in which the Subject believes everyone who perceives the object ought to share the pleasure experienced from the beautiful. 

The third moment is where Kant makes the premise that judgements of the beautiful do not have a purpose; instead, they have the form of purpose, which he calls purposiveness. This concept can be related to what occurs between the subjective and objective during the aesthetic experience such that it is not of objective finality, which is partially internal and external of the object, but of subjective finality, in which the Subject allows imagination to take over (140, right). 

Finally, in the fourth moment, Kant argues that judgement of taste and its coinciding feeling of pleasure is a necessity manifested in the object being perceived. He presents the idea of common sense, which he distinguishes from common understanding by explaining that common sense is the subjective principle, not objective concepts. Kant goes on to connect necessity to the universal voice of the aesthetic by arguing that the demand or ‘ought’ of universal assent is represented as objective necessity, thus leading to a sort of unanimity or universality (144, right).

It is where Kant addresses the relationship between judgement of taste as a matter of feeling and universality that leads to the possibility of substantive disagreement. Once he has established that the aesthetic experience is based on feeling, Kant is able to introduce the idea of free play, in which individual cognition is not governed by definite concepts. The state of free play involves the intersection between imagination and understanding, resulting in the objective representation as one that is universally communicable. In describing the exercise of the faculties of understanding and imagination as a harmonious activity, Kant illustrates that though the two are related and complement each other, imagination prevails without understanding “ruling” or dominating during the aesthetic experience. Now that free harmony is established, synthesizing this idea with universality is where substantive disagreement arises; individuals are entitled to believing that everyone ought to agree with their general cognitions, giving rise to the possibility of disagreement. Moreover, these disagreements are substantive such that they involve both the objective and subjective, in which the individual speaks of beauty as a property of objects and must also argue that others share the subjective conditions (part of common sense) associated with free play.

Kant’s arguments and explanations are nuanced and compelling. However, there are certain instances in which his propositions are not fully developed. In particular, his introduction of judgements of taste involving a middle ground between the objective and subjective is interesting, yet somewhat unclear. What exactly is the interaction that occurs between individuals’ cognition of objective compared to the subjective? Is there one that necessarily takes place before or more often than the other during the aesthetic experience, or is it unique to the individual? In addition, the characterization of pleasure experienced from the beautiful being disinterested is not entirely convincing such that people do find beauty and take pleasure in objects that involve interest, whether they are conscious of it or not.