# noe's *strange tools* - what is the general form of the work of art?

In chapter 8 of *Strange Tools*, Professor Noë begins by arguing that the work of art is a strange tool, such that it is an instrument removed of its purpose or function, and that art is ultimately the enemy or subversion of function; it is the perversion of technology. Unlike how tools and technology are natural to one and are utilized only in the context of one’s needs, works of art do not have such backgrounds of technological needs. With such “ungroundedness,” as Noë calls it, art calls attention to itself and puts the perceiver on display, specifically by unveiling what is unknown. So the work of art begins with the unfamiliar, the unintelligible. It is through these ideas that Noë arrives at the argument that the general form of the work of art is See me if you can! 

But what does this mean? The work of art aims to get its perceiver to see and understand the art. Essentially, the artwork encourages the subject to bring it from blurriness to focus, and this occurs through attentive examination of the work of art. It is important to note that this general form is not the same as “see me!” or “check me out!” Rather, the emphasis from the artist is placed on what is not immediately clear, the initially unfamiliar parts of the work of art. This is because it is the questions and ideas the piece of artwork does not immediately reveal that gives rise to the possibility of discovery. And in recognizing what is missing, strange, or foreign, the perceiver is subject to the artist’s ability to instigate the process from not seeing to seeing and the fundamental shift from unfocused to more focused. But only through careful and thoughtful engagement can the art perceiver reveal the problems and puzzles seemingly hidden behind the artwork, and it is this process and unveiling that is exactly what makes the art significant and compelling. In fact, it is precisely the “staged interrogation”—the interaction that occurs between the work of art and the subject when the artwork forces its attentive perceiver to reflect on what is unsaid or unfulfilled—that the art work happens (134). 

Noë also challenges the counterargument that this general form of the work of art cannot be applied to all art in all situations. He rejects it by demonstrating how the difference between manufacture and art is a real distinction, not just a modern one. And this distinction matters such that all art can be distinguished from manufacture or craft because while manufacture entails directly given standards of excellence that are in terms of usefulness, art involves open-ended standards of excellence that are open to (re)consideration. Tools do not draw the same attention to itself that art does—they don’t say “see me!” And artworks do not have clear functions unlike tools do; tools don’t say “if you can,” since they have specific functions and standards, and they don’t challenge their perceivers to understand them. With the propositions that all art can be distinguished from tools and that the general form applies only to art and not tools, Noë thus concludes that the general form applies to all works of art. 

He adds on to this argument by saying that the general form in fact allows people to make sense of all art everywhere. He presents multiple examples of Renaissance art in which several propositions are made about the role that the artwork plays: that paintings differ from pictures such that they do not merely depict, but are able to stand alone and even go beyond what they display, and that what is put on display ultimately works with ideas. In making the argument that representational pictures fail to reveal what is hidden and only potentially propose questions, Noë highlights that these are two critical elements that distinguish pictures from art pictures or art works. The work of art is able to bring the initially absent or concealed puzzles to surface, and in doing so, allows such questions and problems to show the art contemplator the “answers [that] are normally taken for granted” (136).

The general form of the work of art is See me if you can! Art transforms its contemplators—it not only allows the perceiver to go from not seeing to seeing, but also reveals the crucial questions and puzzles one might not necessarily notice. And through proper attentiveness, such transformation and discovery of what is not yet known can potentially be achieved.