# what is everyday aesthetics? saito's *aesthetics of the familiar*
## phil 110 - aesthetics, fall 2020

While everyday aesthetics challenges the limited scope of Western aesthetics by encompassing what it fails to fully recognize, Yuriko Saito brings in a different perspective such that everyday aesthetics is not simply a new frontier of aesthetics discourse, but should be considered a field that restores aesthetics to its “original task: investigating the nature of experiences gained through sensory perception and sensibility” (1). In *Aesthetics of the Familiar*, Saito argues that elements of the everyday have aesthetic dimensions and should exist in the field of aesthetics. These everyday aesthetic experiences are valuable such that they ultimately allow us as the subjects, or rather, engagers, to develop new perspectives built on the foundations of receptivity, gratitude, and groundedness.

Saito begins her discussion on the aesthetics of the everyday by claiming that ‘everyday’ should entail the ordinary, practical attitude that people take toward what they experience. Along with articulating what ‘everyday’ means, she introduces a key portion of her claim by qualifying a common argument and saying that though positive and negative aesthetic experiences exist, they both constitute “aesthetic textures.” We have the ability to capture the unique texture of the ordinariness of everyday life so long as we are attentive to what we are experiencing; in fact, Saito argues that such attentiveness is a requirement for any kind of aesthetic experience. This is similar to Dewey’s perspective, which is that we must deliberately be active and engaged with our environment to potentially reach the point of “consummation” or fulfillment. 

There are essentially two notions of everyday aesthetics: those that occur through what Saito refers to as “defamiliarization of the familiar,” and those that take experiences of the familiar as familiar. With the former, ordinary aspects of life are rendered out of the ordinary and made unfamiliar—the familiar is defamiliarized. There is sometimes discomfort, even alienation, that arises from our presumed inability to frame, organize, and reorganize the seemingly familiar world around us, consciously or not. Various approaches to altered perceptions of the ordinary including Zen-enlightenment and Camus’ account of the absurd have ethical importance such as allowing us to put aside preconceived ideas and guiding us to live mindfully by paying careful attention, which widens our aesthetic horizons and enriches our lives (18). 

Though this process of defamiliarization has benefits such as developing open-mindedness, mindfulness, and gratitude in which we are able to derive satisfaction and pleasure from our existing surroundings through active attention and engagement, Saito argues that this perspective and Dewey’s idea of “an experience” are restrictive and do not allow everyday aesthetic experiences to act in their full potential. Specifically, defamiliarization and integral experiences cause everyday activities to stand out against the background of routine or ‘humdrum,’ which in itself negates the core of everydayness. Instead, it is the second model of everyday aesthetic experiences we should pay more attention to and incorporate in everyday aesthetic discourse. Even experiences of the humdrum are charged with their own unique aesthetic character, adding to aesthetic textures of everyday life and providing feelings of comfort, stability, flow, and pleasure in the ordinary. This perspective of the humdrum as an aesthetic texture differs from Dewey’s in that according to Saito’s reading, he classifies humdrum as not “an experience,” but “anesthetic,” indicating he would not really consider humdrum as part of the aesthetic realm, while Saito states that its aesthetic texture “characterizes the texture and rhythm of everyday life” (27).

Saito uses laundry as a case study to challenge its status as an aesthetic outcast, legitimize a seemingly mundane activity as a subject of aesthetic discourse, and further illustrate the workings of aesthetics in everyday life. Again, she brings in Dewey’s idea of “an experience” to explain how the integral experience restricts the aesthetic dimensions of laundry; unlike the familiarity of laundering, integral experiences do not happen frequently as everyday experiences do, and they imply a sort of standout moment. In addition to criticizing the Deweyan model, Saito also qualifies the argument that laundry is done primarily for practical purposes by claiming that such practicality does not disqualify it from the realm of aesthetics. Established models of art and aesthetics to the everyday do not adequately describe the relationship between laundry and aesthetics because many decisions and actions made during the process of laundry are actually motivated by aesthetic concerns, such as heat or time settings, separating light from dark clothes, and using hangers to avoid wrinkles (119-120). Though others might say that stains and wrinkles give bad impressions and therefore have practical functions, Saito states that such functionality stems from appearance and feel, thereby invoking aesthetic dimension (120).

In this section, Saito argues that “more mundane aesthetic experiences should equally garner our attention because of their prevalence” (122). Laundry has a multilayered aesthetic influence; it not only gratifies our senses with physical delights that come from the process of washing, ironing, or hanging items, but also with satisfaction from the end result. These aesthetic pleasures are felt when we engage in the activity and are qualities that distinguish laundry from the conventional “spectator-based” aesthetic discourse and Deweyan model, which Saito indicates are not all-encompassing of laundry’s aesthetic facets. Directly comparing Saito’s notion of active participation to Dewey’s “an experience,” integral experiences begin with the subject undergoing something, and in return, the thing or its respective properties determines the subject’s doing. Contrary to this account of “an experience,” everyday aesthetic experiences like laundry starts from the perceiver’s end. We must initiate the process of everyday aesthetic experiences by either actively highlighting the ordinary aspects of life and rendering them strange, or focus on the familiar quality of everyday life. Saito ends this discussion about laundry by bringing in its relationship between the environment. There are aesthetically-backed incentives of prohibiting clothesline, sensuous appeals of outdoor laundry-hanging, glimpses of family life and values, and activation of imagination from the juxtaposition between nature and laundry. All of these examples illustrate how everyday aesthetics surrounds us at all times.

For Saito, aesthetic experiences may be had in the face of the everyday. However, it is important to ask whether such experiences apply to everyone who pays special attention to the objects and activities of the everyday. Applying Saito’s fairly broad stance on the meaning of ‘everyday’ makes it possible for everyday aesthetic experiences to take place without the attention or active engagement she deems necessary in the sense that the ordinary can take us by surprise. This means that the familiar needs not to be defamiliarized nor experienced in its familiar context; the subtle difference of an object’s placement or the sudden, random impulse to do an activity like laundry, for instance, can catch our attention without us meaning for them to. And these examples would not be characterized as either defamiliarization or mindful attention to the familiar, yet would also not disqualify them from everyday aesthetics. This is to say that inattentiveness and mindlessness should not be characterized as “enemies” of the aesthetic, as Saito says. Furthermore, one can argue that attentiveness in itself automatically makes something stand out. It begs the question, is it possible for us to pay attention to something without even slightly rendering or altering it out of the ordinary? 

With the laundry test case, though aesthetics might certainly play a part of why we minimize wrinkles or wash out stains, one could say that the core or what is at the root of activities like laundry is not aesthetics directly, but social concerns that dominate and later lead to aesthetic considerations.
