# de anima II.I - soul
## phil 161 - aristotle, spring 2022

In De Anima II.1, Aristotle argues that soul is form and first actuality. He first provides an example of an ax, in which if we suppose that the ax were a living body with a soul, the ax would cease to be an ax if its soul were removed. and then moves to discuss the parts of living things by using the example of an eye. If an eye were an animal and thus a natural living thing that has an intrinsic principle of motion and rest, then sight would be its soul (412b19). This is because form is what makes matter a “this” (412a8), a determinate thing, and sight is what makes the eye a proper or determinate eye as we know it. The soul is the essence of the sort of natural body that is potentially alive (412b11), which in this case, is the eye. Thus, we can say that given the account of the eye as an animal with a soul that is its essence, sight is the form and the essence of the eye. When sight is removed from the eye, the eye becomes just the matter of sight, such that it is not a determinate thing in its own right (412b21). This means that without sight, the eye is now only an eye homonymously (412b22), in which “eye” becomes simply a name for something of different corresponding accounts of the essence (Categories 1a1). For instance, once sight is removed from the eye, an eye becomes no more a real eye than that of a stone eye or painted eye, which are not capable of seeing and thus do not have the essence of sight (412b23). Here, an eye is only homonymously an eye, as its essence is no longer sight, but something else according to the different accounts. Because sight is the form and essence of the eye and thus the soul of the eye on this account, it is what makes the eye a “this.”

Now that Aristotle has explained the case of the parts of the body, he aims to extend his conception of the nature of the soul from the parts of the living body to the whole living body. He shows that the approach used for the parts of living things like the eye to explain the soul can be applied to the whole living body by stating that just as the part of the faculty of perception is to the part or bodily organ that engages in perception, the faculty of perception of the whole body is to the body that can perceive (412b23-25). One way of rephrasing this is that the relationship between a part of the perceptive part of the body, such as an organ, and the part of the whole body is analogous to the relationship between the organs that make up the perceptive body and the whole perceptive, living body. Aristotle then clarifies that the natural living body is potentially alive, and the dead body is not potentially alive (412b26), as the body of a dead thing cannot potentially live. A potentially potentially alive body is one that potentially potentially-can-live and can be called the first potentiality. Seeds and fruits are potentially potentially alive—they have first potentiality—because while they are not living, they are capable of potentially living when provided the correct resources and nutrients. 

Aristotle states that being awake is like cutting or seeing in that it is a second actuality, while the soul is a first actuality (413a1-2). First actualities, like the soul, are capacities to engage in the activities corresponding to second actualities, which are the exercising of the first actualities. For instance, the ability to be awake, cut, and see would be first actualities, while being awake, cutting, and seeing are second actualities, as they are the exercising of the first actualities. Thus, the soul is a first actuality: it is a first actuality similar to the capacity of sight and the capacity of a tool to cut, as it is the capacity for the natural body to be alive. The natural body corresponds to the potentiality to be alive (413a2), and we can distinguish this sort of potentiality from seeds and fruit which are of the first potentiality, such that the natural body is potentially alive, while seeds and fruit are only potentially potentially alive. The soul is the form of the natural body and the capacity for the natural body to be alive and engage in activities. Because the soul of the natural body is not the actual exercising of the capacities, it is the first actuality of the natural body that is potentially alive. It is the soul, or the form, that makes the natural body of a living thing alive, and thus the living thing.
