
# physics II.6 - chance and luck
## phil 161 - aristotle, spring 2022

In Physics II.6, 197b17-33, Aristotle distinguishes between chance and luck, and uses what it means for an event to be pointless to illustrate chance events. There are types of events that are for something, and what it means for an event to be for something is for it to have an end or a purpose, to have what Aristotle calls a cause. In Physics II.3, Aristotle discusses the four causes, material, formal, efficient, and final cause, in which “for something” can be interpreted as the final cause, something’s end or what it is for. And in this section of Physics II.6, by examining events that are for something without qualification (197b17), Aristotle is assuming that the events in question have a final cause or an end.

An event that is for something can result from chance or luck. Aristotle distinguishes between chance and luck, such that chance is broader and luck is a type of chance. An event results from chance if it has an external cause and the actual result of the event is not what it is for (197b18). What this means is that something happens by chance when it is for something, but, due to some external factor, results in something else. We can see the purpose or end of an event as a sort of requisite for chance events: the event must usually have some particular purpose when it happens. Thus, an event occurs by chance when what results from the event is different than what it is for. 

Luck is a particular kind of chance event—a subset, more specific than chance events—such that an event results from luck if it results from chance and it is an event of the sort that is decided on by an agent who is capable of making a decision (197b19-20). What it means for an event to be decidable by an agent capable of decision is that the event is normally achieved by the actions of human beings, and specifically ones who are able to make decisions; thus, this would exclude all non-decision-making objects or subjects such as inanimate objects and children because they are incapable of decision-making (197b7-8). 

Aristotle introduces the idea of a pointless event to better illustrate what chance and luck events entail, such that an event happens by chance whenever it is pointless (197b30). An event is pointless if an event ends in a result that is not the same as the result of what the event is for (197b23). An example that Aristotle provides is if we say that walking is for evacuating the bowels, such that evacuating the bowels is the purpose of walking, and someone decides to walk for a reason and result that is not evacuating the bowels then we say that his walking is pointless (197b23-26). For instance, if he walks to pick flowers, which is not what walking is naturally for, and if he does not evacuate his bowels, then walking is pointless; in this case, walking does not result in the natural end of walking, which is evacuating the bowels. In other words, an event is pointless if the event is naturally for some X, but the actual result does not succeed in being for that X (197b28-29). Another example of a chance event is a stone that fell and hit someone. The stone did not fall in order to hit someone, but rather, it fell and hit someone by chance because it might have fallen because someone threw it to hit someone (197b32-33). The stone is not for hitting someone, so the result of hitting someone is different from its natural end. Therefore, the stone falls and hits someone by chance. 

Aristotle also presents an example of an incorrect use of pointlessness when referring to an event, such that if someone says that washing himself is pointless because the sun was not eclipsed, he would be ridiculous, because washing is not for producing eclipses (197b27-29). The natural end of washing is not for producing eclipses, so it would be a mistake to say an event is pointless on the presupposition that washing is for producing eclipses. Aristotle concludes that a pointless event is an event that happens by chance, as a pointless event produces a result that differs from what the event is for. We can interpret a pointless event as a type or at least a subset of chance events.

**