# metaphysics IV - principle of non-contradiction and negative demonstration
## phil 161 - aristotle, spring 2022

### final paper

In Metaphysics IV.3, Aristotle states that the principle of non-contradiction (I will use PNC as an abbreviation from here on out) is the principle that it is impossible for the same thing both to belong and not to belong to the same thing, at the same time, and in the same respect, with the appropriate qualifications and distinctions (1005b20-23). In regards to the qualifications, the “same thing” that belongs to something is one and the same thing. Furthermore, the “same thing” must be the actual, proper thing, not one that refers to a thing that is not what it actually is. I will note here that this is one of three main instances in which Aristotle defines the PNC in Metaphysics, and each can be interpreted slightly differently. Shortly after this definition of the PNC, Aristotle presents the PNC again, this time as the impossibility of anyone to suppose that the same thing is and is not (1005b24). One can interpret this statement as the argument that it is impossible to suppose that the same thing is P and is not P. There are several interpretations of this version of the PNC; for instance, it is possible that Aristotle is saying that it is impossible for people to believe that something is both P and not P, that people cannot actually believe in such contradictions. The third rendition comes later in Metaphysics IV.6, where Aristotle states that “opposite assertions cannot be true at the same time” (1011b13-20). In this paper, I will assume the first definition of the PNC to provide a reconstruction of Aristotle’s argument for the PNC in relation to signification, and evaluate the overall structure, the premises leading up to his conclusions of the argument for the PNC, and the implications that follow. 

Aristotle argues that the PNC is the firmest, first principle. The firmest principle is a principle in which it is impossible to be mistaken, must be known best, and cannot be an assumption (1005b13-15). Because the PNC cannot be mistaken, it is the firmest principle, and thus is not a premise or hypothesis of an argument. Furthermore, as the most prior principle, the truth of the PNC must be presupposed for any rational thought. Now that Aristotle has claimed that the PNC is the firmest and first principle, he considers the different possible ways of defending the PNC. One possibility that Aristotle presents and rejects is that of demonstration, and demonstrations are particular deductive arguments in which the conclusions are deduced from true, primary, immediate, better known, prior, and explanatory premises (Posterior Analytics, I.2.71b22). The first, firmest principles are the starting points of demonstration and the foundations of understanding.

People who reject the PNC deny it because they demand a demonstration of it. Aristotle claims that when people ask for proofs or demonstrations of the PNC, such demands are results of ignorance, as they are unable to distinguish between demonstrative knowledge from indemonstrable principles such as the PNC. He shows that the PNC is indemonstrable—it cannot be proved by a demonstration—by pointing out that without indemonstrable principles like the PNC, demonstrative knowledge would be impossible, as they would be ad infinitum; in other words, there would be an infinite regress because every premise of a demonstration would be deduced from another demonstration. If the PNC were demonstrable, that means that it would be deduced from another prior premise that is firmer and prior to the PNC. The PNC would not be the firmest, first principle, which Aristotle has already shown cannot be the case. Thus, it is impossible to demonstrate the truth of an axiom like PNC, an indemonstrable principle. Another implication of the indemonstrability of the PNC is that as a first principle, it is not an object of scientific knowledge, but is still known, since it can be grasped by understanding. Because deniers of the PNC often rely on the lack of a demonstration of the PNC, Aristotle, in showing that the PNC cannot be demonstrated, is already building support for the indubitability of the PNC. 

Given that the PNC is indemonstrable, Aristotle must rely on a different technique to argue for the truth of the PNC. He uses the method of elenctic refutation, or “negative demonstration,” in which elenchus is the Socratic method of argument where the opponent arrives at a contradiction. It is important to clearly distinguish between this method of argumentation from an ordinary or proper demonstration, which Aristotle notes. A negative demonstration does not argue from a prior and better-known principle, which is defined as part of what a demonstration is from Posterior Analytics, 71b12. In a normal demonstration, the defended principle is assumed, while with a negative demonstration, the opponent’s claim is assumed. Another way of understanding Aristotle’s strategy is that through negative demonstration, the truth of the PNC is shown because its negation entails its affirmation.

Aristotle is able to utilize the method of a negative demonstration if the opponent says something; if he does not say something, then there is no rational discourse to be had, as such an opponent is not worthy of engaging in argument (1006a12-15). Further, it must be that the opponent is able to say something significant and signify something both to himself and to another (1006a22). He, the opponent who rejects the PNC, must not only speak of something, but speak of one and the same thing, if he is to claim that the same thing is both P and not P. In other words, to state that something is P and not P, the opponent must be speaking of or signifying one and the same thing. Meeting the criteria of speaking of something significant and one and the same thing is what gives Aristotle the starting point for his negative demonstration. From here, Aristotle does not force the opponent to arrive at a formal contradiction, as this would be “[begging] the question” (1006a18). In other words, Aristotle’s negative demonstration differs from that of a normal reductio such that it does not force the opponent into a contradiction because an opponent who denies the PNC and thus believes in contradictions would not be affected by the contradiction. Thus, Aristotle simply needs to find a non-contradictory statement from the opponent that rejects the denial of the PNC, that the PNC is in fact true. Specifically, he gets the opponent to show that the opponent does accept the PNC, that something is P and is not not-P at the same time. As long as the opponent states that something is not a contradiction, then Aristotle has succeeded in his defense of the PNC. 

Before providing a reconstruction of Aristotle’s argument for the PNC, I will clarify the key components that form the argument. Aristotle uses the example of the signification of ‘man’ to illustrate how if the opponent claims that words like ‘man’ signify an indeterminate number of things or have several different definitions, then there would be no rational discourse, as the opponent would fail to say anything significant. Aristotle defines ‘man’ as ‘biped animal’—‘man’ signifies one thing, which is ‘biped animal’—and this definition applies to every man. So, anything that is a biped animal is a man (1006a34). However, if someone says that ‘man’ signifies more than one thing, that ‘man’ signifies an indeterminate number of things, then everything would be the same, rendering it impossible to distinguish between things that are different. Thus, it must be that in order for rational discourse to happen in the first place, one must think of one thing, and that one thing is assigned to one signification. This connects to what Aristotle says earlier about the need for the opponent to speak of something. For ‘man’, when one thinks of ‘being a man,’ it is impossible for him to think of ‘being a man’ as ‘not being a man’ if ‘man’ not only signifies about one thing, but also signifies one thing (1006b14). We can understand the difference between signifying one thing and signifying about one thing by appealing to subject and predication. ‘Man’ is not only significant as a subject, but also what is predicated of ‘man,’ and what is predicated of one thing is not the same as having one signification. If this were the case, then ‘musical thing’, ‘pale thing’, and ‘man’ would signify one and the same thing, and thus be synonymous. This discussion about signifying and signifying about something is important because one interpretation is that Aristotle is making the argument that if the opponent is to deny the PNC, he must be signifying the same thing and arguing that contradictory predicates apply to that one thing. Without picking out one and the same thing, the opponent would not be able to apply contradictory predicates, meaning he would not be able to reject the PNC.

At 1006b24, Aristotle uses the concept of signifying and begins his negative demonstration. He asks the question of whether it is possible that ‘man’ and ‘not man’ not only signify the same thing at the same time, the definition of the PNC, but exist in reality. Like a reductio ad absurdum, we start with an assumption that is the negation of the principle in question, that the PNC does not hold. For the PNC to hold in the ‘man’ example, it must be that ‘man’ and ‘not man’ signify different things. If the PNC does not hold, such that ‘man’ and ‘not man’ do not signify different things, then ‘being a man’ and ‘not being a man’ also signify the same thing, and they would be one (1006b24-25). If they are the same thing and are one, then they are one single thing (1006b27). However, Aristotle has already shown that they are not the same thing, but different; to say that something is a ‘man’ is to say that it is a ‘biped animal,’ as ‘biped animal’ is what ‘man’ signifies, and ‘biped animal’ is a necessary signification of ‘man’ (1006b29-30). Because it is by necessity that something that is a man is a biped animal, then it is impossible for a man to not be a biped animal. This is because if it were indeed possible that man is not a biped animal, then it would be impossible for ‘man’ not to be. This is where the opponent must reject the denial of the PNC, as he must assert that a contradiction cannot be true. Aristotle concludes that it is impossible at the same time true to say the same thing is a man and is not a man (1006b34). Furthermore, it is impossible that a man both be and not be in reality.

Aristotle offers several other reasons that support the PNC, such as but not limited to how deniers of the PNC must also deny essentialism, are not able to distinguish different things, must deny the principle of excluded middle, and have beliefs that conform to the PNC. I will focus on the argument for the PNC as required for signifying things, as it is in this section that Aristotle most directly and clearly applies the negative demonstration technique. I have previously indicated that Aristotle’s negative demonstration of the PNC only shows that not believing in the PNC is wrong and does not necessarily prove the PNC itself, as proving the PNC would require a demonstration, which we have already shown to be impossible. Thus, it would be relevant to evaluate the strength of Aristotle’s negative demonstration as an argument for the PNC. First, we should examine the argument to determine whether Aristotle ever “begs the question,” as doing so would make his negative demonstration flawed. In my reconstruction of the argument, it seems that Aristotle does not ever assume the truth of the PNC. This is a critical component of the strength of Aristotle’s argument, as he ensures that the truth of the PNC is not assumed during the argument. However, it might be worth further comparing Aristotle’s negative demonstration to a normal reductio ad absurdum to determine the strength of the negative demonstration. Reductio ad absurdum is the method in which one starts with a rejection or negation of a statement, arrives at a contradiction, and therefore concludes that the original statement is true. We can outline the general structure of a reductio ad absurdum as follows:

1.  It is not the case that P (assumption).
	
2.  It is the case that Q and it is not the case that Q (contradiction).
	
3.  Thus, it is the case that P (reductio ad absurdum). 
    

Unlike a normal reductio ad absurdum in which getting the opponent to assert a contradiction immediately leads to the assertion of the principle in question, Aristotle’s negative demonstration cannot rely on this same strategy. Instead, the opponent asserts that a contradiction is impossible, which then entails the PNC. I will argue that this form of argument is valid, and will weigh its strengths based on the structure of a reductio. With a reductio, a formal contradiction must be present in the argument, and such a contradiction is derived from the assumption, the negation of the principle in question. With Aristotle’s negative demonstration, he forces the opponent to accept the PNC without relying on many other hypotheses; in other words, Aristotle mainly limits his argument to the implications of ‘man’ and not man’ in terms of signifying one thing in order to show his opponent that the PNC is in fact true. This suggests a further point in evaluating the strength of Aristotle’s argument, which is by considering the relationship between the negation and the assertion of the principle in question. For instance, if the negation of the PNC necessarily entails the assertion of the PNC, then the negative demonstration is stronger than if the negation of the PNC did not necessarily entail the assertion. If getting to the assertion of the PNC requires many other hypotheses, the argument would be weaker. We see that it is in fact the case that a man is a biped animal by necessity, as ‘man’ signifies ‘biped animal.’ However, a question that one might raise is why exactly if it is true to say of something that it is a man, that it is necessarily a biped animal. In particular, is it the nature of signification itself that causes the necessity of a man to be a biped animal? Furthermore, with contradictions in ordinary examples of reductio ad absurdum, we are able to better understand the contradictions themselves by determining where the inconsistencies in the arguments occur, as well as what statements or parts of statements and the relationships among them lead to such inconsistency. Aristotle’s negative demonstration is also able to do this. Relating this to the earlier idea that Aristotle mostly relies just on signification to force the opponent to accept the PNC, one might even argue that it is more clear to see where and when the opponent must reject his denial of the PNC, as there are not many other hypotheses and premises involved.

While Aristotle’s negative demonstration does seem to argue for the PNC rather convincingly, it has several limitations. For one, although Aristotle does not seem to beg the question, the argument that the opponent must accept the PNC might be weak, as the opponent himself believes that it is possible for one thing to belong and not to belong to the same thing at the same time. So, one can argue that the opponent, in originally denying the PNC, does not need to accept Aristotle’s refutation of the denial of the PNC. In essence, because the opponent believes in the possibility of contradiction, even though he asserts the impossibility of contradiction, he does not necessarily need to fully accept the PNC; he could believe that the PNC both does and does not hold. Secondly, Aristotle’s negative demonstration is limited in that it is only an argument that considers language, as it relies on rational discourse; it does not properly consider whether contradictions in thinking or actuality are possible. 

Finally, an interesting third limitation of Aristotle’s argument is that not only is it restricted to language, but a narrow subset of language, which is the subset of the words or phrases associated with the things that have signification. Aristotle does not consider full sentences or propositions. The fact that these are not in scope for Aristotle’s argument makes it more difficult to see whether or how the PNC continues to hold true for these cases. For instance, if we examine reductio ad absurdum in propositional or predicate logic, we would notice that the contradictions in the proofs or subproofs often come as a result of the assumptions and the propositions themselves. Oftentimes, we are more concerned with the form of the propositions and arguments more than the meaning of the individual propositions, as it is the relationship within and between the propositions that determine the kinds of conclusions that follow. Aristotle’s negative demonstration does not rely on the form or syntax of the statements made in the argument. Rather, it almost exclusively relies on the semantics and meanings of the words or phrases and what they signify. Although this does not necessarily mean that Aristotle’s argument is weak simply because it does not have a syntactical component, it does illustrate the limitations of his argument.